[blog] Introducing callback support in style overrides (#30668)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/callback-support-in-style-overrides.md

---
title: Introducing callback support in style overrides
description: We're excited to introduce the callback support for global theme overrides in this minor version update!
date: 2022-01-20T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['siriwatknp']
tags: ['MUI Core', 'News']
card: false
---

> The release of MUI Core [v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/releases/tag/v5.3.0) allows you to write a callback in style overrides (the global theming) which gives you full control of component customization at the theme level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MUI Core [v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/releases/tag/v5.3.0) introduces the ability to write a callback in style overrides (the global theming), giving you full control of component customization at the theme level.
```

> How does a callback better than the existing plain object? Let me explain from the beginning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why is using a callback better compared to the existing plain object? Let me explain from the beginning.
```

This leads to a bad theming experience because developers need to know the specific key to customize.

We believe it would be better for developers if they could create custom styles by reading the component props, without ever needing to know what key they should use.

Fortunately, it is now possible in v5 because of the new style engine powered by emotion. Theming is simpler and more flexible. You only need to know the component's slot name and then provide an **object** (static overrides) or a **callback** (dynamic overrides).

## Using callback in `styleOverrides`

The callback gives you the `props` that the slot received. Most of the time, you would use:

- `props.ownerState`: the combination of runtime props and internal states.

> - `props.theme`: the object you provide to `ThemeProvider` or the default one.

Reviewer 2: Aren't they merged, so it's a combination of both is a theme object is provided to theme provider?

> - `props.theme`: the object you provide to `ThemeProvider` or the default one.

Reviewer 2: Aren't they merged, so it's a combination of both is a theme object is provided to theme provider?

> - `props.theme`: the object you provide to `ThemeProvider` or the default one.

Author: Yes, what I meant is the merged theme. Is `runtime theme` better? or more confusing 😂

```jsx
import { ThemeProvider, createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

<ThemeProvider
  theme={createTheme({
    components: {
      MuiChip: {
        styleOverrides: {
          // you can now use the theme without creating the initial theme!
          root: ({ ownerState, theme }) => ({
            padding: {
              small: '8px 4px',
              medium: '12px 6px',
              large: '16px 8px',
            }[ownerState.size],
            ...(ownerState.variant === 'outlined' && {
              borderWidth: '2px',
              ...(ownerState.variant === 'primary' && {

>                 borderColor: theme.palette.primary.light,

Reviewer 2: OT: How circular references prevented/resolved?

Author: Sorry, I don't quite understand. Can you give more details?

Reviewer 3: I don't think that there is any risk for circular references.

              }),
            }),
          }),
          label: {
            padding: 0,
          },
        },
      },
    },
  })}
>
  ...your app
</ThemeProvider>;
```

> > 💡 The side benefit of using a callback is that you can use the runtime theme without creating the outer scoped variable.

Reviewer 2: > the outer scoped variable

Will developer know what this means? (I might just be missing some context.)

Author: My point is some developers might do this:

```js
const theme = createTheme();

<ThemeProvider theme={createTheme({
  components: {
    MuiButton: {
      styleOverrides: {
        root: {
          // just to give an example where I want to access theme in styleOverrides.
          // I have to create theme variable at the outer scope.
          backgroundColor: theme.palette.common.black,
        }
      }
    }
  }
})}>
```

Author: > Will developer know what this means?

Good point, I guess not everyone would understand. I add it without an actual code sample because I think it is just a side benefit which is not the main purpose.

Reviewer 3: > I think it is just a side benefit which is not the main purpose.

We have multiple threads where developers complain about this. But from what I remember, it was a step before. It was for building the core set of design tokens, not so much for customization of components.

### TypeScript

The callback is type-safe.

- `ownerState`: `ComponentProps` interface, eg. `ButtonProps`, `ChipProps`, etc.
- `theme`: `Theme` interface from `@mui/material/styles`.

```tsx
{
  MuiChip: {
    styleOverrides: {
      // ownerState: ChipProps
      // theme: Theme
      root: ({ ownerState, theme }) => ({...}),
    },
  }
}
```

If you extend the interface via module augmentation like this:

```ts
declare module '@mui/material/Button' {
  interface ButtonPropsVariantOverrides {
    dashed: true;
  }
}
```

you will be able to see those props in `ownerState.variant` 🎉. `theme` can be augmented as well.

## Experimental `sx` function

Initially, `sx` was designed to be a prop that enables you to inject styles with a shorthand notation to components created with the `styled` API:

```jsx
import { styled } from '@mui/material/styles';
import Box from '@mui/material/Box';

const Label = styled('span')({
  fontWeight: 'bold',
  fontSize: '0.875rem',
})

<Box sx={{ display: 'flex' }}>
  <Label sx={{ color: 'text.secondary' }}>Label</Label>
</Box>;
```

> > 💡 All MUI components are created with `styled` API, so they accept `sx` prop by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 💡 All MUI components are created with the `styled` API, so they accept `sx` prop by default.
```

> > 💡 All MUI components are created with `styled` API, so they accept `sx` prop by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 💡 All MUI components are created with the `styled` API, so they accept `sx` prop by default.
```

> `sx` helps developers write less code and be more productive once they are familiar with the API. With the callback support in `styleOverrides`, it is now possible to use `sx` like syntax at the global theme overrides.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`sx` helps developers write less code and be more productive once they are familiar with the API. With the callback support in `styleOverrides`, it is now possible to use an `sx`-like syntax in global theme overrides.
```

> `sx` helps developers write less code and be more productive once they are familiar with the API. With the callback support in `styleOverrides`, it is now possible to use `sx` like syntax at the global theme overrides.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`sx` helps developers write less code and be more productive once they are familiar with the API. With the callback support in `styleOverrides`, it is now possible to use an `sx`-like syntax in global theme overrides.
```

Reviewer 2: Whoops!

All you need is to use the [`experimental_sx`](/system/styled/#how-can-i-use-the-sx-syntax-with-the-styled-utility) function:

```jsx
import {
  ThemeProvider,
  createTheme,
  experimental_sx as sx,
} from '@mui/material/styles';

<ThemeProvider
  theme={createTheme({
    components: {
      MuiChip: {
        styleOverrides: {
          root: sx({
            px: '12px', // shorthand for padding-left & right
            py: '6px', // shorthand for padding-top & bottom
            fontWeight: 500,
            borderRadius: '8px',
          }),
          label: {
            padding: 0,
          },
        },
      },
    },
  })}
>
  ...your app
</ThemeProvider>;
```

> If you want to create a dynamic style based on props, you can return an array from the callback:

Reviewer 2: Perhaps explain the example? Either: "In the following example" or with inline comments (or both). Also consider if other examples would benefit from further explanation.

---
title: Introducing callback support in style overrides
description: We're excited to introduce callback support for global theme overrides in this minor version update!

> date: 2022-01-20T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 3: Are we good with the date? Do we want to use the release date of v5.3.0 or the release date?

Author: Yep, I will mark the next Monday as the blog post released date.

authors: ['siriwatknp']
tags: ['MUI Core', 'News']
card: false
---

> MUI Core [v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/releases/tag/v5.3.0) introduces the ability to write a callback in style overrides (global theming), giving you full control of component customization at the theme level.

Reviewer 3: This could be clearer:

```suggestion
[MUI Core v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/releases/tag/v5.3.0) introduces the ability to write a callback in style overrides (global theming), giving you full control of component customization at the theme level.
```

> Why is using a callback better than the existing plain object? Let me explain from the beginning...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Why is using a callback better than the existing plain object? Let me explain from the beginning…
```
